Uh good morning everyone. This is uh
lecture A6, distal rethinking 2026.
At this point in the course, you have
mastered multiple regression, right? No.
Um but you've got basically all of the
core statistical mechanics of basian
regression under your belts. You really
do. And now you're going to have to
practice it and rehearse it and fight
with it and all of that stuff. But
really, the statistical mechanics part
of this course is over. And now we're
going to talk about scientific topics uh
integrated with that much more about
causal inference and the informal
frameworks of causal inference and how
you can use them to do the estimator
design part. Um and this is going to be
uh this lecture and the next one are
going to focus on using DAGs direct
cyclic graphs uh make structural causal
models and design regression
estimators from them. uh but I'm not
going to be really mathematical about
it. Uh but I'm happy to take uh any kind
of technical questions you have after
class or or through email and answer
those things. In these lectures I want
to give you a graphical introduction and
get the concepts across. Um as always
illustrated with examples. Before I get
into that um I want to share a Tumblr
meme. Uh I don't know some of you know
this. This is a classic to me. It's a
classic. Uh, everyone called Ogre stupid
and it true. Ogre barely even literate.
Ogre finally finished reading Ulisses.
People know the book Ulisses. It's a
modern classic, I think. Really
excellent book. Um, but Ogre uh Ogre
only can't identify surface level themes
like religion and nationalism and can't
comprehend deeper ideas like the remorse
of conscious that makes James Joyce's
novel a modernist classic and so on. Why
am I showing you this? Uh there's a
tendency for students to be hard on
themselves with this material. Uh this
material is Ulisses. Not not that my
material is Ulisses, but the topic is
Ulisses. Like it's really subtle and
there's a bunch of different levels and
you can come back to it over and over
again and get something new out of it.
You shouldn't be hard on yourself
because you haven't comprehended or the
deep structure of everything on the
first pass. Okay? Don't be like Ogre.
We're all Ogre. That's maybe a better
way to put it. Every single one of us is
ogre, right? But ogre should not beat
himself up. Ogre's smart, [laughter]
right? You just have to keep moving
forward and come back to it. It's also
fine to appreciate Ulyses only on a
superficial level. It's still good.
Yeah, there's still lots of value in it,
right? The deep reading is not essential
all the time. And maybe years from now,
you want to come back to this material
and get a really deeper understanding of
it. And that's great. That's fine, too.
Okay? You have my permission to be ogre.
It's all fine. Okay, that's that's my
therapist talk for you. But I mean it. I
really mean it. Uh this is this
profession. I think I've said before,
but if I haven't, I should have. There's
this real tendency in science uh since
we identify uh so much with our work,
right? There's a tendency to do that
that we're really hard on ourselves when
we're struggling with stuff. We take it
as very self-critical about things and
that's rough and it's that's not going
away. I'm sorry. like that's just part
of the profession, but we could at least
do it more publicly and and and have
some support here. So, this is why Ogre
is here. Okay, remember Ogre. Um, Ulyses
is great, too. You should read it. Uh, I
think there's a comic book version. It's
also good.
Okay, let's talk about heavy metal
instead. So, uh, the topic of today is
confounding, but this is one of my
current favorite example of confounding.
Uh, so there's this global survey of
happiness. You may have seen these
things going around. There these people
who call themselves happiness
researchers. How do you get that job?
[snorts] But uh basically it's
questionnaire research. They ask people
I don't think they use the word
happiness in the survey like life
satisfaction or or things like that. um
different ways to assess it and you can
construct these quantitative scores
indices from it of uh in this case each
point is a country a contemporary uh
country and um on the horiz that's on
the vertical axis on the horizontal axis
we have the logarithm of the number of
heavy metal bands per million people in
each of those countries
somebody counted them I don't know this
is not my data um and there's a there's
a there's a positive relationship
between these two things. Uh the blue
points are the Nordic countries and at
the very top is Finland up there which
has a surprising amount of metal heads.
Yeah, it's an interesting phenomenon.
[snorts] Okay. Um I don't endorse this
as a causal inference, right? But it's
it's it's a joke and that's it's an
interesting thing where yeah, surely the
amount of heavy metal is not making the
population happy. Maybe the other way
around. Maybe there's a reverse causal
thing. I could go for that one maybe
after a few beers. Uh but uh
correlations uh I put this up to say
that correlation is common and this is
one of the big struggles in doing
scientific inference. It is not unusual
for things to be correlated even really
strongly correlated in in observational
samples. That's one of the reasons we do
experiments. Uh and no matter how strong
the correlation is, it's not
particularly solid evidence of a causal
relationship. Um, you can construct
endless examples of these. The book has
this example about Waffle House. Um, if
you have not uh visited the United
States or especially the southern United
States, you may not be familiar with
Waffle House, but in the southern US
it's a ubiquitous diner. It's great. I
highly recommend it. If you like hash
browns, hash brown potatoes. They also
do a good steak. surprisingly
um the idea someone someone questions
that but there are better stakes to be
had but at that price it's hard to beat
right it's a schnipion as we'd say here
in Germany so um there's a strong
relationship between the number of
waffle houses per million people and the
divorce rate in each US state
fascinating compelling right no causal
relationship obviously it's ridiculous
but that's the point correlation is
really common so how do we go beyond ond
correlational evidence to causal
evidence is of course the topic of this
in the next lecture
um uh in a time series just the last
example of this in a time series it's
even easier to find strong correlations
in time series and there's a whole
website here uh this this I give you the
link at the bottom which just harvests
these from data sets public data sets
and finds arbitrarily high time series
correlations
uh and it's it's obvious again this is a
divorce one this is why I chose it. But
per capita consumption of margarine, um,
if you're European, you may be lucky
enough not to know what margarine is.
[laughter]
Margarine is the devil's butter, right?
Is it's like butter, but it's made from
seed oils and air or something. I'm not
sure, but it's it's not food. Please
never eat it. But it's consumed
regularly in the United States. Um,
okay. Uh, so what do we do then? So when
we construct our statistical estimators,
I call them recipes jokingly on this
slide. Uh one of the things we're often
trying to do is avoid confounding. And
I'm going to use confounding in a quite
non-technical way in this course. It in
epidemiology, it has a specific meaning,
which I'll get to later in this lecture,
but I just want to say it's anything
that confuses you about causation
because that's the plain English meaning
of the word. Epidemiologists have
defined it as one particular statistical
thing, and that's fine. They can do
that. But in general in statistics it
has a broader meaning. Um so you say a
confound is a feature of a sample and
how it's used that mislead us about the
causal relationships among the
variables. Uh and confounds are diverse
and and really scientifically
interesting in and of themselves. I
believe it's not just omitted variables.
It's not just things we haven't measured
that can mislead us. It's also things
that we have measured and we've used
improperly just to escalate the threat
for you. Um and the point of today's
lecture is to give you some formal
approach to those relationships. How
confounding arises both through things
we haven't measured or haven't included
and through things we do include uh
improperly.
Um I I note now that this office meme is
way too old for anyone to understand it.
No, someone Okay, there's two people who
have three. Okay, three. All right, I'll
take that. That's a win. If three
understand it, it stays. Um okay.
uh I mentioned in an earlier lecture
about using heruristics uh I'm not
against heruristics uh but there are bad
heristics and good heruristics and as
researchers of course we want to go
beyond heristics to be able to justify
them because you're taking chances with
heristics so it's nice to understand
where they come from so that you know
when you're in a situation where the
heristic doesn't perform well um so the
there are lots of bad heristics in
applied statistics in the sciences most
of them I want to say not invented by
statistician But in physicians,
[laughter]
noticing,
choosing models based upon their R
squares. This is a formula for disaster.
Please never do it. In fact, R has no
use at all in my opinion. It's
absolutely strange how much people like
it. Um this idea of trying of dropping
all the variables that don't have
significant p values. uh you've seen it,
right? Okay. But it's it's a great way
to get published, but it's not a great
way to figure out how nature works. Uh
unfortunately, uh but it's a heristic um
uh causal free decision trees like the
one on the right hand side of this
slide. This is from chapter one of my
book, but I drew it. I redrew this, but
it's from someone's actual I just didn't
want to make fun of them, so I redrew it
myself. But you can find these all over
the place. When I say it's causal free,
everything in here is about the
measurements, but not about what causes
the measurements or their relationships.
As if you the recipe is entirely about
the the the properties of the
spreadsheet column, right? And then you
can decide what test to do. And this
does not work. I hope I've convinced you
already. I'll definitely convince you
today. Um, and then conformity. Uh,
conformity is a thing a heristic pe
people use in all walks of life. It's
not always bad, right? what other people
do is often a good idea. So, I'm not
going to blanket say I mean I'm a very
non-conformist person myself, but please
don't imitate me, right? I'm crazy. But,
uh, conformity is not always a bad idea.
Often, it leads you to a good first
approach to solving a problem. Um, but,
uh, it's as researchers, I think we have
this obligation not just to be right
about something, even when a heristic
lead you to the right idea, we also want
to be able to justify it. And that's a
special burden of our profession. uh if
if you're in industry, it's enough to be
right. You don't have to understand why,
but it's different in science. We need
to be right and be transparent about the
reasons we're right. Does that make
sense? Justified true belief is
knowledge, right? The justification is
important. Um
uh there are some great heristics in
applied statistics uh that I'd be happy
to endorse, but I want to be able to
explain these to you using this in the
next lecture so you understand where
they come from and why sometimes they
don't work and you'll be able to
recognize those cases. These would
include the idea that when you're doing
a multiple regression, you would include
all the pre-treatment variables. Those
would be things that you could measure
before the treatment was assigned.
Yeah. If you're if it's an observational
study, the the treatment is the thing
you want to estimate the causal
inference of. So now you need to think
about what what is downstream causally
of the treatment. Things that are
upstream of the treatment or unrelated
to it causally or pre-treatment
variables. And it's often a really good
idea to include those in a regression.
Yeah, you can get more statistical
efficiency from that. Um
uh you want to exclude post- treatment
variables, things that are downstream of
the treatment. And I'll give you an
example today of why. You may already
know why uh this is this is a great
curistic. Um it's not something you
always want to do. In fact, I want to
teach you that sometimes we specific
specifically want to violate this
heruristic because of our goals. Uh but
again, it's the idea that it's a
heruristic. Um
and uh something more nuanced which I
could actually do a whole hour lecture
on but I I what a course that would be.
uh don't compare um uh
don't compare outcomes to a baseline
that is something that happened at an
earlier time but compare them to some
alternative treatment. Uh there's this
thing called a single arm trial in
clinical research that people do where
you you just give a treatment to one
group of people and then you compare
compare them like a year later to how
they were before they got the treatment.
This is not a valid inference regime.
Okay? And again we want to that's a
great heruristic. Don't do that. But you
want to as professionals, you want to
know why you shouldn't do that because
knowing why leads you to understand why
the thing you're doing instead is
useful. And again, it's this issue not
just about being right, but being able
to justify why you're right. Um, so I I
asked provocatively at the bottom, what
if there were a better way? Like this is
some kind of late night television
advertisement. Yes. Um, so sorry I
couldn't resist putting this slide in,
[laughter] but uh it's what happens when
you write lectures late at night. Um, so
this is some text I I collected. I have
this folder where I collect the world's
worst method sections.
Yeah. And I I don't do it to be mean
because I don't like post it online
usually. Um, I do it because well, this
is what I do for a living. I I want to
train people to do better. So bad
examples are useful, right? Negative
examples and are just as useful as
positive examples. So this is a very
typical bad method section from an
observational epidemiology paper. Uh
which which I don't know why I still
read this stuff, but um uh you can read
this at your own time, but basically
it's just a a a list of unjustified
um covariants that were added to the
model. And some of them are just
hilariously described, right? just just
really strange stuff in here. Um
insurance coverage,
right? Um uh there's another paper I
collected where one of the co-variants
was the number of tortillas people eat
per week.
Sure, if you've got it measured, throw
it in there. Right? So maybe these are
valid coariantss, but there's no
justification. Uh you can't they just
say, you know, based upon our knowledge,
we chose these. What you're not seeing
here is what we really want, which is a
transparent um description of what we
believe about the causal relationships
among these variables. Uh because the
things on the right hand side of your
regression are also related to one
another. And those relationships, as I
want to start building up for you today,
matter uh in the meaning of the
coefficients that uh that appear in
front of them. And that's what we're
driving towards in this lecture and the
next. Okay. Um, so we're going to talk
about causal reasoning, a way to be
transparent about our causal assumptions
and then use this magical tool called
logic. I'll explain what that means
later, but logic where you have premises
and then there's an algorithm for
applying them. That's what I mean by
logic here to derive consequences of our
assumptions and build an estimator. As
always, if your assumptions are bad, the
results will be bad
probably. [snorts] Uh, but I I often
think that's the best we can do. Yeah.
Uh I I had the sermon before about
liking assumptions because if you want
powerful inference you need to make them
but you need to make good assumptions
right and that's our responsibility
causal reasoning in this way by making
transparent causal assumptions there's a
range of abstractions it's not one thing
so we're going to talk about direct
jyclic graphs because this is a great
entry point it's sort of the most
learnable uh form of this I think it's
broadly applicable but not always
applicable and dags are on this extreme
abstract end. There are things more
abstract than DAGs, but I'm not going to
teach you those. We could go even more
abstract. Why are DAGs abstract? Because
there are no distributional assumptions
in directed as cyclic graphs. The only
information they contain are the
variables and the arrows.
That's it. And so what you can do with
DAGs though even despite that
abstraction is the ability to ask well
um what in principle can be done before
we make further assumptions and that's a
really nice thing right so they
sometimes to get further and in in this
class I've always been saying we want to
make distributional assumptions because
we get more power that way but the DAG
itself is the knowledge you get from it
is is nice in and of itself because
you'll know if your inferences are
robust to specific specific
distributional assumptions. Yeah. Uh
it's a nice sort of thing uh to say. But
as we move from the abstract end towards
what I call here bespoke, which is a
term used in tailoring for a suit that
fits, right? Have you ever heard this
term before? Now, this is fairly archaic
English word that's only used in men's
fashion, I think. But a bespoke suit is
not off the rack. It's been made to
measure for you. Yeah. And um we will
talk about a bespoke causal model is
really tailored in detailed ways to
scientific context you're working in. Uh
there are things that are intermediate
like structural equation models which
are DAGs plus distributional assumptions
and maybe some other things too like
assumptions about directions of effects.
You can add those to structural equation
models um and do lots of good stuff but
they're kind of in between.
Um uh and then there are these sort of
design style things which are common in
political science and economics like
difference and difference designs,
instrumental variables which are also
kind of in the middle area because there
are structural relationships plus some
minimal set of distributional or
directional assumptions that are needed
to get an estimate. So they're somewhere
in between. But again, the goal is to
make as few assumptions as possible in
those designs and say what is licensed
under those situations. and when you
can't get anywhere then you'll add
another assumption right is the idea
like you incrementally move yourself to
the right and then on the far right
we've got things like explicit families
of ordinary differential equations which
are used in lots of fields um in the
sciences in biology and epidemiology
genetics to model lots of different time
dynamic or spatially dynamic systems and
you can do a lot of causal inference
with these as well but the exact
techniques are different okay Um, I'm
not going to do an example of an OD uh
model in this section, but in the other
section I do, right? So, if you stick
with it or come back next year, I'll
show you an OD example. Okay. Um, DAGs
have become uh popular in the last I
don't know 15 years. I've started seeing
them everywhere. I was a PhD student at
UCLA and we all saw DAGs there because
they teach them in the school of public
health and UDPL is in the computer
science department there. UDP being one
of the the father of DAGs, so to speak.
I'll tell you that there's someone else
who's the father of DAGs and and Uda
agrees, [laughter] right? It's somebody
else in a moment, but you'll see these
things all over, right? This is I get
the feel these are familiar to all of
you. You've seen them and you don't
understand them. Yeah, maybe you haven't
seen them and you don't understand them,
but they get big and you get lots of
arrows like this. I mean, when you see
this, it's just like you black out. You
wake up on your kitchen floor, right?
What happened to me sort of situation.
Um, what I want to teach you is that all
of these the properties of these DAGs
are driven by a set a small set of rules
that I can teach you today. Um, and no
matter how big the DAG gets, it's always
the same rules and the same rules for
decomposing and answering questions
about it. And that's the good news. Uh,
they look complex, but they actually
aren't more complex as they get bigger
in in a processing sense. you can still
apply the algorithms and deduce things
about them. Um the uh actual father of
DAGs uh I would say is Sul Wright. He
didn't derive the complete framework and
he didn't call them DAGs but he started
doing statistical genetics in the 1920s
well in the 1910s really and really did
the most to develop this framework of
these what we call path diagrams at the
time but they're structural causal
models that are then used to design
statistical techniques and that's what
he developed um and he studied um coat
patterns and guinea pigs which he loved
dearly and kept a lot of guinea pigs Uh,
and we're not going to talk about coke
patterns in guinea pigs, but this is a
dag. Say it's like the first published
dag uh in western science. Um, here's a
picture of Sul Wright with a guinea pig.
Uh, he used to lecture with them on the
bench in front. Uh, many of his students
talked about how many guinea pigs he had
and how much he loved them. And there's
this apocryphal story from one of his
former students saying he
absent-mindedly once erased the
chalkboard with a guinea pig because he
would hold them while he was lecturing.
Any of you had guinea pigs? They're very
cuddly. Yeah. And so you can imagine him
holding one and he's got the eraser in
the other hand and then he forgets which
hand has the guinea pig. Anyway, there's
no photographic evidence of this
unfortunately, but I like to believe
it's true. Um, okay. So, here's the goal
here. Uh, we'd like to specify
structural causal relationships and use
them to derive estimates. I've showed
you this in a cartoonish sense in the
previous lectures, right? But without
sort of saying what the rules are. I'm
going to be more formal now. uh these
methods go by different names. Path
analysis is what Sul Wright called it.
Structural equation models are
particularly uh a particular uh range of
parametric assumptions applied to path
analysis and directly as cyclic graphs
are the modern completely non-parametric
set of methods where with no
distributional assumptions. Um the
motivating questions are things like how
can we analyze data as if it were from a
randomized experiment? uh in my field
anthropology that's the situation we're
in most of the time. Anthropology is not
an experimental field, right? It's you
can't do experiments on human evolution.
You shouldn't do experiments on human
evolution. Um lots of other uh human
sciences are in a similar position. What
you can do experimentally is very very
limited. So uh is science possible in
such fields? We know it is because we've
learned things, right? So how is it that
we justify that knowledge? um when you
can do experiments, you still need to
understand why they work. And I was I
was talking to some people before I
think I was speaking with you right
about this in a previous uh previous
week that um lots of people who do
experiments don't know why experiments
work and that's not harmless, right?
because sometimes you mess up the
randomization and then you want to know
uh what's going on or you need to design
the blocks in a particular way to avoid
systematic error and you can mess up
experiments during the data analysis too
which I want to show you an example of
today so even if you do all the
randomization right so it's this stuff
is for experimentalists as well the goal
today is just to teach you what's called
the rules of deparation
um D here is is directional so we have
directed graphs and in directed graphs
you can talk about separation. What's
the separation? It's information
separation. So let I'll give you
examples and then you'll understand. And
in this there are four kinds of
confounding I want to talk about. I call
them the elemental compounds because
this is it. There are no other kinds,
right? And they're simple tiny little
subgraphs of the DAGs. Uh and I call
them the fork, the pipe, the collider,
and the descendant. Other people call
them different things. I'm sorry. It's
just how it goes. Um people sometimes I
even accidentally call them other things
but uh uh hopefully you'll see
graphically why the fork is called the
fork. We'll start with the fork. Okay.
It's called the fork because it goes in
two directions like a fork in the road.
Yeah. Not like the thing you eat with
but a fork in the road. U
[clears throat] we're focusing on this
variable Z in the middle and Z is a
common cause of X and Y. Uh so the
arrows mean
um causal influence. So information
about Z ends up in X and Y. Sometimes in
this literature you'll you'll hear the
arrows explained as the direction of
listening. X and Y listen to Z. So if Z
says something, X and Y hear it. Now X
and Y know something that Z said. Uh so
then we can talk about information and
joint information among these variables.
uh the and and we'll use the word
association uh for this u for this joint
information. So X and Y end up
associated because of their common
influence Z. They share information.
They both heard Z. Maybe they don't know
all the same things about Z, but they
they know some of the same things about
Z. Does that make sense? Remember, DAGs
are very vague like this intentionally.
We're starting very vague and saying
what can we deduce? And then if if
that's not good enough, you can always
make additional assumptions. to get
stronger inference. Um once we stratify
by Z that means once we divide the
population
uh into subopuls with different values
of Z. That's what stratification means.
Um there is no association between X and
Y. They're independent. And I'm going to
explain that in a series of slides now.
So that that look you're giving me is
expected and fair. Yeah. um I still have
work to do for you. Okay, let me explain
why that happens. But the the sort of
plain English way to say that with my
listening metaphor is again um once we
know the value of Z, there's nothing X
and Y can tell us because everything
they know about Z, I already know
because I know Z. And I know that sounds
ridiculous, but it's statistically this
is what stratification is doing. Um,
okay. So, we think about a simulated
example, and I'm going to do this for
all the little elemental compounds here.
We're going to simulate a thousand
random numbers. We simulate a thousand
Z's. Just uh R bar is Bernoli variable.
Yeah, this is a function in my
rethinking package. If you just try it
in Bas, it's going to get angry at you.
But just load my package. And um it's
just a a binomial with a sample size
one, right? but a Berni distribution
named after some Swiss guy. I forget
which Berni. There's like three of them,
right? Um
and uh then we simulate um X and Y so
that they both listen to Z. And I've
done this in in the simplest way I can
think of where if Z takes the value one,
then um there's a probability 0.9 that X
and Y are one and if Z takes the value
zero, there's a probability 0.1. So
there's an association that arises
through this. I'm going to try to avoid
the word correlation because a
correlation is a very precise version of
association and we want to have a more
general sense. Okay. All this stuff
applies to correlations too but
correlations are are special kind of
association is much more general. Um
good so far. Yeah. And then I show you
just an example uh of such a a simulated
data set. Um this is a a contingency
table. I show you X and uh X and Y. Um
and uh the counts in there are the um
yeah the counts of Z. So uh uh you can
look in see that there's a correlation.
I compute the correlation between X and
Y and you see that they're strongly
correlated. Yeah. So when X is uh X0 and
Y0 appear 397 times and so on. So this
is the um shows you the association
between X and Y.
Then we then now I'm going to stratify.
So this is the statistical thing. I pull
out only those cases where Z equals
zero. And that's the top table. Um and
only those cases where Z equals 1. And
that's the bottom table. Now unless
you've been staring at contingency
tables for years, and I hope you
haven't, you don't immediately see the
consequence of this. So at the bottom I
compute the correlations again but just
for these subopuls and now they're
basically zero. So within each value of
Z X and Y are independent
they have no shared information which
seems paradoxical right? Seems
paradoxical but you're going to get
this. Uh let me show you a picture. Same
thing same data. Now I'm just going to
plot the X and Y values but I'm going to
color them by Z.
And that's what I've done. X- axis uh uh
uh is in this value I've made X and Y
continuous. Yeah. So that's I can't do
tables now but the graph might help you.
So X is a continuous value. Y is a
continuous value but it's
[clears throat] associated um the
average is associated with Z. Um when Z
equals 1, uh X has a higher mean and
when Z equals 1, Y has a higher mean. So
those are the subopuls. When Z equals 0,
that's the blue point. X and Y both have
a lower mean.
When Z equals 1, X and Y both have a
higher mean. And you can see in the code
how that's generated.
Um, so X and Y are listening to Z. Their
means are influenced by Z. You see that?
Yeah. But if we draw a regression line
through all the points, that's the black
line. There's a positive slope. there's
an association between X and Y generated
by their common cause Z. But within each
level of Z, the red points or the blue
points, there's no association.
The same thing again. Yeah. And again
why once we know Z,
any joint information in X and Y about Z
has already been accounted for. There's
nothing extra that X and Y share once
you know the value of Z. It's already
accounted for.
Yeah, does it make sense? Okay. The next
one is super similar structurally and so
uh that is the the pipe is very similar
structurally and that'll help reinforce
this. But before we get to that, I want
to do a quick data analysis example of a
fork. Yeah. Do I have your permission?
Yeah. To to Caroline. Okay. I appreciate
that there's a lot here. Um, but it
unfolds in multiple examples in layers
for you. Remember the ogre, right? Okay.
So, um,
why let's go back to the Waffle House,
but I'm not we're going to forget about
Waffle House and really consider the
pattern of divorce rates in the United
States. Uh, why do why do regions of the
USA with higher rates of marriage also
have higher rates of divorce?
You know, think up your favorite
hypothesis. Maybe keep it to yourself,
though. [snorts]
But think about your favorite
hypothesis.
What is the causal influence of marriage
on divorce? There's a trivial sense in
which you can't get divorced unless
you've been married, right? But but
there's no necessary reason, I think.
Yeah. But um but there's but there's no
uh obligation to get divorced. So
there's no reason that places with more
marriage to necessarily have more
divorce rates, have a higher divorce
rate. It's a rate, right? So it's not
the aggregate number. Uh more marriages
will end in more divorces if the rates
are the same. But that's not what we're
talking about. We're talking about
rates. Does that make sense? Um, and I
show you this scatter plot on the slide
is data from the late 20th century in
North America where we plot state level
marriage rates against divorce rates.
And you see there's a positive
correlation. Um, and I've colored
southern states in red. Uh, southern
states are also where the waffle houses
are. And this is why there's a
correlation between divorce rate and the
presence of Waffle House is because the
southern states have higher divorce
rates. Yeah. Still this is still true.
Um uh so of course uh there's a workflow
here. Um and I'm not going to go through
every detail of this because I've got
all ground to cover, but I want to
remind you that there's a statistical
workflow. What we're focusing on is the
left part here in this lecture. thinking
about the combination of some some
generative model or in this case a a
structural causal model plus some
minimal distributional assumptions to
make the regression run um and a
specific estimate something we want to
learn about that causal model and in
this case the distribution of divorce
when we intervene on marriage that's
just this do way of uh of denoting an
interventional causal estimate that I
introduced in the previous lecture
remember um the do thing is going come
up in the in in the future too because
this whole framework is called do
calculus because of this do operator. I
know it seems ridiculous. That's not my
choice. Um it's just how it is. It means
a causal effect defined as an
intervention, right? Even if you can't
do the intervention, it's it's a
hypothetical intervention. Okay. So
let's think about what the structural
causal model might look like in this
case and show you why the fork is a
relevant problem here. How a confound
arises. Um, another uh variable strongly
associated with divorce rate is age at
marriage. The median age at marriage is
what I'm going to use in this analysis.
And this is strongly uh associated with
divorce rate uh as well. These are the
same states on the right. There's a
negative relationship between agent
marriage and divorce rate. In states
where people tend to get married later,
there are fewer divorces per capita.
Yeah, this is true in Europe too for the
Europeans, right? This is in general
true in Europe. Um uh so it may be age
at marriage is influencing divorce.
Um uh and age at marriage uh uh also
must influence marriage. I'm going to
assert this and you might want to think
about why. Well, why? Because uh it's
just years of exposure,
right? If people get married at younger
ages and more people get married. It's a
crude demographic fact about about uh
people and yeah, years of life. Any
event that happens later in life, there
will be fewer people left around to
experience it. This is quite grim for a
morning lecture. Sorry, but it's true.
Happens all the time. Yeah. It's like
mutations. There are population
geneticists in the audience, right? You
know this thing about mutations that
affect you late in life. Most of them
are never expressed, right? Because most
people historically never live that
long. Yeah. So, this is like the it's
like marriage when people get married
late. Fewer people ever experience it.
Um, so I should stop talking. Really? I
mean, this is, you know, if I ran a
dating site, it would be really
depressing. Okay, [laughter]
so uh we've got these three variables,
and I'm going to assert that this is a
good DAG to start with. Um, and age at
marriage is a potential confound, and
it's a fork because it's a common cause,
a common influence of marriage and
divorce. So, if we're going to assess
the causal relationship between marriage
and divorce, we have to do something
about this fork. What's a principled way
to do something about this fork? And the
answer is I taught you in the previous
slides to stratify by age at marriage
because once you've stratified by age at
marriage the subopuls for each age at
marriage uh there's no common residual
common cause left between the things at
the end of the fork informationally and
that solves the confounding problem in a
principled way. Um
yes we're going to I say here break the
fork. I'm not sure I like that metaphor
now anymore. um we're going to interrupt
the fork. Uh we're we're going to remove
the association that arises from the
common cause by looking within
subopulsions of the data. That's
mechanically what we do. We just do it
with a statistical model that hides
that, right? Because we don't have to do
it by hand. Um previous generations of
statistitians in the early 20th century
had to do all this with sums of squares
on a piece of paper, right? And the more
computerized we get, the more this is
removed from you. But it's nice to know
still what's going on.
Um right uh but we're going to use a
we're stratifying by continuous
variable. What does that mean? Well um
when it's indiscrete values you can
think about subopuls right so say there
were only three values of median age at
marriage you can still stratify by
those. With a continuous one, it's it's
parametric stratification by that you
have an infinite number of subpopuls
now. But if you're willing to define a
functional relationship uh that connects
them uh and here it's going to be
additive, then you can still uh do the
stratification. And that's what linear
models do. Uh when we assert there's a
linear relationship between agent
marriage and the uh average divorce
rate, then we're we've got a way using
multiple regression to do the
stratification for a continuous value.
Yeah. But if you want to bin it and
assure yourself right just round median
age agent marriage to some bins any
arbitrary number of bins and rerun the
model you'll then you can understand it
as a categorical thing if you take the
limit to infinity I know just take the
limit to infinity he says it's it's just
like that then you get this result um uh
but it's the same it's the same
conceptual idea uh so there's nothing
new about this regression I don't think
right we did this last week where we had
multiple predictor variables with
multiple coefficients. Um what I want
you to see here is when we're
stratifying
uh by age that is age age at marriage is
not our focus capital a subi you can
think about it for any particular fixed
value of a subi it's just part of the
intercept it just locates the average
response uh now in that subopul and so
I've refactored this equation at the
bottom of this slide so it looks like
that you can think about for any fixed
value of a subi the intercept is alpha
plus beta a a sub i. And then there's a
slope with m.
Yeah. And the question is once you've
done that, you've computed all those
intercepts for the different a values,
is there any what's the value of beta
subm? Is it zero? Those would be that's
because it's the regression in the sub
populations that we want to estimate.
And that's why this this uh regression
works that way, right? because you're
you're
getting all those subpopuls in the
intercept and then computing beta subm.
Just like when we conditioned on Z, we
only computed the slope with by a
computing it within each and then
averaging across them. We get the
average slope across the subopuls and
that's what we're going to get here too.
We're going to get the average beta m
across all the subopuls for a. Does that
make some sense?
Yeah. This is the mechanics uh of it.
Um, here's the basian model. I'm going
to take a little bit of time to to come
back to basian workflow because I think
it's nice to remind you about some of
what's going on. We need some priors.
Uh, when you're working with linear
regression,
um, uh, there's this really nice trick.
I introduced this last lecture uh, by
talking about centering, but now we're
going to go the next level. We're going
to standardize um our variables, which
means give them means of zero and
standard deviations of one. Uh why?
Because it's often much easier to put
scientifically reasonable priors on
these things when you have standardized
variables. I want to show you an example
of that and show you another example of
prior predictive simulation. Um the top
part of this model doesn't need any
comment. Yeah, you're okay with that?
Yeah, the normal distribution in the
linear model is just two predictors.
Okay, it's all those priors and those
question marks that we need to fill in
like what would you choose there? We're
going to standardize our data. Um
uh so this is just sort of the study
slide about this. Standardization means
you subtract the mean uh of the variable
from each value and then you divide by
the standard deviation of the original
value. And that means now the new
variable has a mean of zero and a
standard deviation of one. They're
zcores, zed scores. Yeah. um makes the
often makes the computations work easier
and and conceptually it's easier to
choose priors. A nice thing too is it
removes the units on the variable.
Uh and I don't like units. Units uh god
knows no measurement scales. I've talked
about this before, right? units are
measurement scales are an arbitrary
invention of the human species and they
get in the way and when you start doing
science you've got to sometimes just
have parameters to translate between the
measurement scales and so it mucks up
your models if you can divide out
measurement scales often everything
becomes easier just try it'll make your
life better absolutely I had a great um
physics teacher in high school who
impressed me with this with endless
examples of trying to solve physics
problems where if you just divide out
all the units it was just like oh my god
we're
Like suddenly it makes sense. But you
leave all the units in there and it's
trash. It's just trash, right? I think I
told the joke before like you know the
physicist dies, goes to heaven and meets
God. It's like God I have this question.
It's always bothering me. Why is the
speed of light 2 blah blah blah blah you
know meters per second or whatever? And
God looks at him puzzled and goes what
do you mean the speed of light is one
right? So that's ha. Yeah I know it's
funny but no it I think it's funny but
that's measurement scales are bad. So
zcores don't have measurement scales.
This is another nice thing about them.
Okay.
Um prior predictive simulation. So uh
let's put in some default prior which
are very typical in applied basier
regression. But the foreshadowing here
is I don't like these priors and I'm
going to show you why. Uh so the usual
advice is choose some flat prior. Why?
Because frequentists like flat prior.
In this class we don't care what
frequentists like. It's not that we it's
not that we're t trolling them. That's
not We don't care. We really just don't
care. We're not trolls. We just don't
care. I mean, we won the stats wars, so
we we we're not going to kick the dead
horse, right? But uh we these these
priors are very very flat. A normal
distribution with a standard deviation
of 10 has a variance of 100.
Right? So within a zcore range, remember
if it for a zcored variable, 95% of the
data are between minus2 and two. I'll
say that again. For a zcored variable,
95% of the data are between minus2 and
two. Yeah. Does that make sense? Okay.
So, a variable with a mean of zero and a
variance of 100 has most of its
probability mass outside that interval.
That's a crazy prior for data scaled
like this. And that's what I want to
show you. So, we're going to do a prior
predictive simulation. And that's what
the code is on this slide. Uh, in this
case, I'm I'm doing the prior predictive
by hand. There are examples in the book
where you can use quap to do it. it
it'll sort of automatically do prior
predictive simulation for you, but it's
nice to know how to roll your own as we
used to say.
So here we just sample from the priors
uh n times 20 times. We're going to get
20 lines from the prior and then I just
draw the lines. Yeah, that's all there
is to it because the prior is full of
lines just like the posterior will be.
Right? Good. Um and what does that look
like? It looks like this. These are
crazy relationships. there uh the slopes
can be in implausibly strong right
because the prior on the slope is zero
with a variance of 100 so you're getting
slopes which are basically vertical on
the scale of the data yeah bad prior you
see flat prior are just scientifically
inadmissible quite often now we're not
looking for a prior that's so tight that
it determines the relationship we're
just looking uh for the prior predictive
simulation to give us stuff that's
possible in the outcome space Yeah, I'm
not going to constrain this to be
positive or negative or anything like
that. And I'm happy if it's really
strong sometimes or zero sometimes, but
this is not good. Yeah. Um, so let's try
again. Let's try uh an intercept around
0 2. Um, we know the intercept should be
near zero because we've standardized the
variables. And for a bariate
relationship once you've standardized
the variables if you're at the average
value of X which is zero then the
average value of Y will also be zero
because the averages of the variables
are zero right so if I I've taken it's
like I've taken the height of a person
and I've made the average zero by
rescaling and I tell you okay now I'm
thinking of a person who has an average
height tell me their weight you'll say
the average I hope you will you should
you should say the average and the
average is also zero right so the alpha
should be around zero I'm not going to
fix it on zero although that would be
fine. Here, I'm going to let it move,
but I'm going to put a prior near zero.
Um, and then for the slopes, I centered
them on zero, so there's no bias,
positive or negative. And I'm going to
give them a standard deviation of a half
and show you the consequences of this.
Uh, and this is much better. I'm not
saying this is perfect. We're not
looking for the perfect prior because
we're not trying to preit the data.
We're just looking for priors that
weakly regularize by staying within a
scientifically plausible range. So for
standardized variables, these are pretty
good default priors. Does this make some
sense? I want to say one more thing
about these priors though and and I I'll
come back to this theme uh in a couple
lectures towards the end of this course.
As you add more predictors to a model
like this, the priors on the betas need
to get smaller. I'll say that again. As
you add more predictors to a model like
this, more beta coefficients, the the
the variance on the priors on the beta
should get smaller for scientific
reasons. Why? How? Because if you if
they're all the same, then the variance
the prior variance explained by the
model is going to grow as you add
predictors.
Yeah. But you don't believe that as a
scientist just because you've added
variables to your model that you'll be
able to really explain more causal
variation. Right. So at least in the
human sciences and observational work uh
if we can explain 10% of the variance in
the outcome variable that's a huge win
right this is R square talking about R
squares right just on fit R squares are
quite modest uh for observational data
like this in political science 10% would
be like a blockbuster result I've
explained 10% of the variation in wages
wow no one would believe you right it's
just not going to happen um so that
implies Then the prior R 2 escalates as
you add more predictors and you keep the
priors constant. I'm going to revisit
this problem. There are solutions to
this really principled interesting
solutions to this problem. It'll come up
later. Again, if you have a big sample,
you'll still get away with it and will
be fine, but it's useful to think
through the scientific basis of the
things. Okay. Sorry for every one of
these slides, I've got like a mini 30
minute lecture that I'd like to deliver
to you, but I I do none of us have time
for that. Okay. analyze the data. I'm
not going to linger on this slide.
You've seen the quap stuff before and
this is an example in the book. Uh
please take a look at that chapter. Is
it chapter five, six? I forget which
one. I only wrote the book. It was a
while ago. I think it's six. I think
this is chapter six. Um but this whole
example is done painfully slowly in
chapter six. So you if you have
questions about the quap specification,
you could look there. Um we get some
estimates. We get a poster. Here's the
marginal posterior distribution plotted
on the right. Now we ask the question,
what's the causal effect of M? Um, and
you're tempted to say, well, it's the
value
uh of it of the coefficient of BM.
Um, and you'd be right in this
particular case, but I want to I want to
u problematize this a little bit because
in general, that's not true. In general,
the causal effect uh could depend upon
all the parameters because it's an
intervention. So, you need to compute a
contrast. In an additive model, it just
happens that you're lucky since
everything's additive that the contrast
will give you the coefficient back. But
I want to walk through the contrast for
you because as soon as you're doing
nonlinear things like logistic
regression or pluson regression, uh
which you need, uh then the coefficient
is not the causal effect anymore.
Okay? because it's a nonlinear model.
Um, and there are ceiling and floor
effects which I'll talk about when I get
there. That that's why in log logistic
regression everybody's always talking
about odds ratios and weird stuff like
that which are not on the outcome scale
but the causal effects on the outcome
scale, right? It's what happens to
people, right? It's not what happens to
the coefficient. Yeah. So, uh, we'll
come back to this. This is not bad news
by the way. This is this is a good
feature of statistics because it means
it matches the world. Yeah. when that
happens, the facts that odd ratios are
not sufficient. But in an additive
model, you're lucky. And I just don't
want you to walk away from this lecture
thinking that it's always the
coefficient. In general, it's not. Uh,
and if you have interactions in an
additive model, it won't be one
coefficient either. It'll be multiple
coefficients. Okay. So, what you need to
know is how to simulate interventions.
Um, and I think we got 10 minutes left.
I think I can I can take my time and and
uh do this topic some justice and and
finish with this today and then we'll
pick up with the other uh confounds next
time. Um
so uh causal effect or at least the the
narrow types of causal effects that
we're looking at so far in this course
uh means a manipulation of the
generative model, some kind of
intervention. That's the word we're
using. So think about um our original
DAG there in the upper right of this
slide uh where there's no intervention.
That's the generative system. Um uh if
you changed A or nature changed A, it
would have effects on M and D. The
effects on M uh would pass through to D
again because M influences D. So there's
two two causal uh two ways that changing
A would influence the outcome. Um what
if we intervene on M? What does that
mean? That means we delete all the
arrows into M. We're like playing God.
Yeah. If we manipulate M, we're the
cause of the value of M. That's the idea
of the intervention. At least in a total
intervention. There are soft
interventions, too. But we're not going
to do those in this class. But you those
are the real ones you do in the world.
You know, soft interventions like you
try to get people to do to to read a
book, right? You can the treatment is
assigning them to read a book. That's
what you have control over. Getting them
to read the book, you have no control
over, right? You respect their agency.
Uh so, but we imagine that we have an
intervention that's always successful.
Then we are assigning the value of M.
Yeah. And that effectively means
mutilating the DAG to remove all the
arrows into the treatment into the thing
we're manipulating. So there's only one
arrow into M here. So only one arrow
gets deleted, but that gives us the
graph on the bottom. Does that make
sense?
Um, so that's what you can do when you
think about you've got any DAG and you
want to imagine an intervention, a
randomized experiment. If there are any
arrows pointing into the treatment,
delete them because that's what you're
doing experimentally. And this is what
makes experimental inference possible is
because it removes compounds, right? As
soon as you've done that, if you did
experiments where you manipulated him,
you're deleting all the arrows into it
and now there aren't common causes of
the uh treatment and the outcome. Does
that make sense? It's not about balance,
right? This comes up quite often.
Experiments work because of coariant
balance. No, they don't. They they don't
even have coariant balance usually,
right? They can. And coariant balance is
good for other reasons. Uh but it's not
essential for causal inference. Yeah.
What's essential for causal inference is
you move the systematic error that
arises from from common causes.
That make some sense. Um okay.
Uh so let's think about what that means.
Then when we compute the causal effect,
you do this simulation. That's what it
means. And depending upon your DAG, that
might be complicated or it might be
simple. Here it's simple. We're going to
do a simulation now from the generative
model where we delete the arrow from A
to M. And then we use the posterior
distribution, the estimates of the
generative model we've gotten from the
data and run that simulation. I'll say
that again. Okay. So we had the original
data set. We have this generative model.
We designed an estimator using it and an
estimate
distribution for the components of the
generative model. Now those are the
intercept and the slopes and the
standard deviation. Those are the
components. We've learned about them. We
have a posterior distribution. We don't
know them for sure. We have a posterior
distribution. Now we're going to use
that posterior distribution to simulate
our intervention as if we could
determine M. We're going [clears throat]
to fix m at values we choose
two values that's the minimum and then
we're going to run a simulation where a
has no influence on m anymore because
we're doing an intervention and then
we're going to compute the contrast
between the uh the effect of changing m
from one value to another and that's the
causal effect of m. Does that make
sense? And yes, it's going to turn out
to be the beta coefficient. And I'm I'm
sorry that it seems so complicated. But
that's only because it's an additive
model. In general, if this was logistic
regression, the answers wouldn't be the
same, right? Or a plus on regression or
anything other than an additive model.
Actually, it's very it's kind of a shame
um if you'll allow me 30 seconds of
amusement. uh that when we teach stats
or all of us, we start with additive
Gaussian models which have a bunch of
really convenient special properties
which are true of almost no other kind
of statistical model and that's it's
weird kind of and then if you stop there
like you never take a stats class beyond
that you'll believe that all statistics
has those properties but Gaussian
additive models are very special in
regards like having additive variance
and the the coefficient is the causal
effect and a bunch of other things
That's not true of other statistical
model types. It's just kind of a
problem. And I could imagine a stats
course where I'd flip it drastically the
other way around and no one would take
this course. But we would start with um
Koshy distributions which have infinite
variance and no mean, right? I mean, so
assuming there a variable has a mean is
an assumption, right? So you can imagine
the the devil statistician course,
right? Where you start and like every
all the first examples are Koshy
distributed variables. What can you
prove? You've never heard of Koshy. I
can tell by the faces in the audience.
Sorry, there are random variables, Koshy
distributions that have no means. There
are variables that have no mean. And you
might say to yourself, but surely if I
measured them all, I could calculate the
mean. You could, but that's not the mean
of the variable. It tells you nothing
about the next value you sample because
the variable has infinite variance.
Nature contains these variables. I'm not
making this up. I don't I love the faces
here. Yes, join my newsletter. I can
tell you disturbing things every week if
you want. No. Um, but I'm not going to
teach this course, but it would be a fun
exercise. Um, anyway, and then you
assume that finite variance and then you
get a mean and then you could do
Gaussian models and well, no, first we
do first we do student t distribution
models and then we do Gaussian models
and like eventually you would end up at
multiple regression, but it would take
you 10 weeks. Yeah. Does anyone want to
take that course? No. Okay, one person.
Thank you. We'll do this sometime, but
uh I think it would be fun when I retire
maybe to write that book. Um it will I
will die while writing it. No. Okay.
[laughter] So, here's the simulation.
We're going to I'm going to simulate
some A values, right? We're just going
to start there and get our population.
Um 10 the 3 A values, a thousand A
values. Uh then we're going to simulate
um D fixing marriage rate at zero, which
is the sample mean. Remember these are
standardized values. So this isn't rate
zero. This is the average across states.
Okay. Um so now with the posterior
distribution
um I uh what that width statement does
in R. I know all of you here use R but
maybe you don't use the width function.
What's great about with is you're
creating a sub environment and you can
pass it um a list and that's what post
is. It's a list of variables and it's a
named list. And now every time a symbol
in post appears in the formula, it's
going to take the values from post.
So you you don't have to explicitly
mention post. This is a fantastic way to
write code and avoid mistakes. It
creates an environment. Those of you who
were more R gurus, you know what
environments are, whoever scoping and
things like this. So with has its own
scope and the scope, the top level scope
is determined by the things you give to
it. Program with width. It's really a
great thing to do in R. uh for the R
folks out there. Um so that means the A
and the BM and the BA and sigma in that
R norm line are being pulled out of
post. They're the posterior samples.
Yeah. And you don't have to do post
dollar sign or such nonsense in your in
your code which makes it really messy.
Um so that then we just so we simple
some normally distributed uh divorce
rates. Um and then we do it again for m
equals 1. We increase M by one standard
deviation. You don't have to do it one
standard deviation, but um you could do
it by two. You could do it by a half.
It's whatever intervention you want to
simulate. Yeah, you can make it smaller.
You could make it a negative number if
you want. And then we simulate again. Um
uh
and um you'll see the code's the same
except that m changes to one instead of
zero. Yeah, you see that? Okay. Uh we're
doing science here, I promise. And uh
and then we just compute the contrast.
The contrast between m= 0 and m= 1 is
the value when it's one minus the value
when it's zero. Um the ordering is just
so it's positive. Did it the other way
be negative? But it's the same
intervention. And then I plot the
distribution. And that's what you see
here. And it's really centered right on
zero
um with uncertainty uh spanning between
-2 and two. So we don't have a super
precise estimate, but there's no
indication that it's strong uh in any
particular direction, which is also what
the beta coefficient tells us. Yeah,
there's there's a lot of scatter here
because we're simulating with sigma,
right? This is the causal effect for for
individual states which have additional
variance due to the standard deviation
of the outcome, right? So that's another
thing about the causal effect that's
different here. Does this make sense?
um you you really need to play with this
on your own at your own computer to
think it through step by step and then
if you have questions bring them to me
next time and I'll be happy to start
there and and we'll go through the
questions. Um
uh so let's before we move on let's talk
about the causal effect of of age at
marriage which you could also get from
this model. You could use the same kind
of simulation, but there are no arrows
to delete here,
right? Um, but what I want you to
understand is that when you're thinking
about the causal effect of intervening
on age at marriage, you don't want a
condition on marriage rate,
right? You, and this is what's going to
lead us to where we'll start with in the
next lecture. The total causal effect of
agent marriage goes through two passs.
But that's not your question. Your
question is what's the causal effect of
of agent marriage? The fact that it
passes through two or three or four
causal pathways is not the question.
You're not trying to decompose it. And
therefore, the proper statistical model,
the proper estimator does not include M.
Yeah, you should ignore it. This is
another nice thing about this framework
about structural causal modeling is it
tells you which things are ignorable.
Conditional on your assumptions of
course, but you can justify your
assumptions. So conditional on your
assumptions, you don't need all the
variables. Isn't that relaxing? Isn't
that nice? And then when someone asks
you, well, why didn't did you uh did did
you uh uh did you control for marriage
rate? And you can say I did not and I
did not because that would have given me
the wrong estimate.
Look at behold my dag. [snorts] Isn't it
glorious? And it says here that if I
conditioned on M, M is a post- treatment
variable. And conditioning on post
treatment variables is bad. Yeah. And
I'm going to explain why when you return
next time because we'll start with that
kind of path. Not a fork, but a pipe.
That is three variables that are related
in the same direction through causal
inference. Um, I appreciate that there's
a lot in this lecture. There is a book.
I gave it to you. Uh on page 140 to 144,
I have a very slow explanation of all
this simulating causal effects stuff
with the same example. So if you're all
confused by this and again remember the
ogre, it's normal to be confused by
this. Um be patient with yourself, go
take a look at pages 140 to 144. Okay.
Um thank you for your attention. I know
this is a lot. When you come back next
time, we'll finish up the elemental
compounds and then I'll show you how to
use them jointly to talk about designing
multiple regressions. Thank you.